# Predicting-caries-outcome-in-young-adults
Objective: The aim of the study was to predict dental caries outcome in young adults using longitudinally obtained protective/risk factors recorded from childhood to adulthood
Methods: This study was conducted using the Iowa Fluoride Study dataset. Sex, mother’s education, family income, composite SES, caries experience at ages 9, 13, and 17, and the cumulative (AUC) estimates of risk and protective factors, including fluoride, dietary, and behavioral variables from ages 5-9, 9-13, 13-17, and 17-23. These predictors were used to model the age 23 D2+MFS count. The prediction was performed using 5-fold cross validation with nested resampling techniques and the following supervised ML techniques (LASSO regression, generalized boosting machines (GBM), negative binomial (NegGLM), and extreme gradient boosting model (XGBOOST)) were compared. 
Results: The prevalence of cavitated level caries experience (D2+MFS >0) at age 23 was 69.1%. The mean D2+MFS count at age 23 was 4.75 (SD = 4.32). The predictive analysis found LASSO regression to be the best performing model (compared to GBM, NegGLM, and XGBOOST), with a root mean square error (RMSE) of 0.70, coefficient of determination (R2) of 0.44, and mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.48. After dichotomization of the predicted and observed values of the LASSO regression, the classification results showed accuracy, precision, recall, and ROC AUC of 83.7%, 85.9%, 93.1%, 68.2%, respectively. Age 17 caries count, age 13 caries count, the amount of sugar-sweetened beverages intake at age 13, and the frequency of sugar-sweetened beverages intake at age 17 were important and positively associated in the prediction of cavitated caries count at age 23. 
Conclusion: Dental caries prevalence in young adults in this study was high and the ML model showed high accuracy and precision in the prediction of caries in young adults. Data from a more diverse population is needed to improve the quality and generalizability of caries prediction. 
